[docs] Improve authentication doc (#38735)
expo/expo: docs/pages/develop/authentication.mdx

</Collapsible>

<Collapsible summary="One-Time Passcodes (OTP)">

An alternative to magic links is sending a one-time passcode by email or SMS. Instead of clicking a link, the user copies the code and manually returns to the app to enter it. This must happen within a specific time window before the code expires.

There's no deep linking involved here. The user stays in control of the flow and must return to the app themselves.

Fortunately, newer versions of Android and iOS automatically detect passcodes in incoming messages. This enables autofill suggestions above the keyboard, allowing users to enter the code with a single tap. When this works, the experience is seamless.

> **info** Magic links and passcodes are both valid authentication methods for App Store and Play Store review. You can submit your app with either of these methods as the only option and get approved, even before adding social or OAuth login options.

</Collapsible>

## OAuth 2.0

To let your users log in using their existing accounts from services like Google, Apple, GitHub, and more, you can use OAuth 2.0.

> [OAuth 2.0](https://oauth.net/2) is a widely used, secure protocol that allows your app to access user information from another service, without needing to handle passwords. It allows your users to to log in with a single tap, which saves time, builds trust, and removes the need to manage passwords.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[OAuth 2.0](https://oauth.net/2) is a widely used, secure protocol that allows your app to access user information from another service, without needing to handle passwords. It allows your users to log in with a single tap, which saves time, builds trust, and removes the need to manage passwords.
```

Typo

> > **info** OAuth flows can be complex. If you're looking for a simple integration, most providers offer SDKs and services that handle everything for you. You can learn more about these in the [Auth Solutions](#auth-solutions) section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **info** OAuth flows can be complex. If you're looking for a simple integration, most providers offer SDKs and services that handle everything for you. You can learn more about these in the [Auth solutions](#auth-solutions) section.
```

Typo

> If you are looking for full control or want to understand how OAuth works under the hood, keep reading. This section shows how to implement a complete OAuth flow yourself using Expo.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are looking for full control or want to understand how OAuth works under the hood, the following sections show how to implement a complete OAuth flow yourself using Expo.
```

### How OAuth Works

OAuth works by introducing an authorization server that acts as a secure middleman. Instead of giving your app their password, users log in through this server and approve access to specific data (like their name or email). The server then issues a temporary code, which your app can exchange for a secure access token.

<ContentSpotlight src="/static/images/develop/authentication/oauth-flow.png" />

> > **info** In the above diagram, the term "client" does not imply any particular implementation characteristics (for example, whether the application executes on a server, a desktop, mobile app, or other devices).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **info** In the above diagram, the term "client" does not imply any particular implementation characteristics (for example, whether the application executes on a server, a desktop, a mobile app, or other devices).
```

This feels like, it should the diagram's caption. You can use `caption` prop on the `ContentSpotlight`.

Once you understand this pattern, you can apply it to any provider. The setup for Google, Apple, or GitHub will follow the same general steps.

### Custom OAuth with Expo API Routes

The previous diagram shows a high-level overview of the OAuth flow. However, the preferred method for a client to obtain an authorization grant from the user is to use an authorization server as an intermediary, which is exactly what you can build using Expo API Routes.

The following diagram illustrates this flow in more detail:

<ContentSpotlight src="/static/images/develop/authentication/api-routes-oauth-flow.png" />

Expo lets you implement the entire OAuth flow directly in your app using:

<BoxLink title="Expo Router" href="/router/introduction" Icon={BookOpen02Icon} />

<BoxLink title="Expo Router API Routes" href="/router/reference/api-routes" Icon={BookOpen02Icon} />

<BoxLink title="Expo AuthSession" href="/versions/latest/sdk/auth-session" Icon={BookOpen02Icon} />

> Some providers offer native APIs to handle the sign-in flow directly within the app. Google offers a native Sign in with Google experience on Android. If you're looking for a native implementation, see the [Google Authentication guide](/guides/google-authentication). Apple provides Sign in with Apple, which uses a native bottom sheet and Face ID on iOS. See [Expo Apple Authentication](/versions/latest/sdk/apple-authentication) to learn more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some providers offer native APIs to handle the sign-in flow directly within the app. Google offers a native Sign in with Google experience on Android. If you're looking for a native implementation, see the [Google authentication guide](/guides/google-authentication). Apple provides Sign in with Apple, which uses a native bottom sheet and Face ID on iOS. See [`expo-apple-authentication`](/versions/latest/sdk/apple-authentication) reference.
```

Let's use the package name here.

> This setup gives you full control over the login experience across Android, iOS, and Web.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following setup gives you full control over the login experience across Android, iOS, and web.
```

<Collapsible summary="What are Expo API Routes?">

[Expo Router API Routes](/router/reference/api-routes) allow you to write server-side logic directly inside your Expo app. You can define functions that handle requests just like an Express or Next.js backend, no need for an external server.

This makes it easy to securely handle sensitive parts of the auth flow, like the [authorization code exchange](https://www.oauth.com/oauth2-servers/pkce/authorization-code-exchange), directly within your app. Since these routes run on the server, you can safely manage secrets, issue JWTs, and validate tokens.

> > **info** You're essentially building a lightweight custom auth server scoped to your own application, all using just your Expo project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **info** You're essentially building a lightweight custom auth server scoped to your own application, all using your Expo project.
```

</Collapsible>

<Collapsible summary="What is Expo AuthSession?">

[Expo AuthSession](/versions/latest/sdk/auth-session) is a client-side package that helps you open a web browser or native modal to start the OAuth login flow. It handles redirection, parses the authorization response, and brings the user back into your app.

> It's the tool that kicks off the flow and talks to your API Route once the user has authorized access. See [Authentication with OAuth or OpenID providers](https://docs.expo.dev/guides/authentication/) for more info.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's the tool that kicks off the flow and talks to your API Route after the user authorizes access. See [Authentication with OAuth or OpenID providers](/guides/authentication/) for more information.
```

- Improve readability
- Internal links are relative

</Collapsible>

This setup lets you:

- Start the login flow using AuthSession
- Receive the auth code in your API Route
- Exchange the code for a token securely
- Generate a custom JWT with your own logic
- Return that token to the client
- Store sessions using cookies (Web) or JWTs (Native)
- Deploy instantly using EAS Hosting (free to start)

The following tutorials cover implementing OAuth on Android, iOS and Web, including how to create and verify custom JWTs, manage sessions, and protect API routes. If you're new to this flow, we recommend starting with the Google tutorial.

<VideoBoxLink
  videoId="V2YdhR1hVNw"
  title="Google Sign-In with Expo OAuth"
  description="Learn how to implement Google Sign-In with Expo Router API Routes"
/>
<br />
<VideoBoxLink
  videoId="tqxTijhYhp8"
  title="Sign in with Apple using Expo"
  description="Learn how to implement Sign in with Apple"
/>

<br />

> <Collapsible summary="Managing Sessions After OAuth">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Collapsible summary="Managing sessions after OAuth">
```

Handling the OAuth flow securely is just the beginning. Once the user is authenticated, you need to think about how to store, restore, and validate their session.

This includes:

- Storing the session securely on the client
- Restoring it when the app restarts
- Protecting your API routes so only authenticated users can access them

Traditionally, [cookies](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Guides/Cookies#what_cookies_are_used_for) are used to store sessions on the web, while [JSON Web Tokens (JWTs)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON_Web_Token) are common in native applications.

> In our tutorials, we demonstrate exactly how to handle this. After receiving the ID token from a provider like Google or Apple, we generate a custom JWT on the server using Expo API Routes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above tutorials demonstrate exactly how to handle this. After receiving the ID token from a provider like Google or Apple, you generate a custom JWT on the server using Expo API Routes.
```

This gives you full control over the session, including:

- Structuring the payload using consistent fields across providers
- Customizing expiration times
- Signing the token with a secret key so your server can verify it later

Once the token is created:

> - For native apps, you can store it securely using [Expo Secure Store](/versions/latest/sdk/secure-store)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For Android and iOS apps, you can store it securely using [`expo-secure-store`](/versions/latest/sdk/securestore/)
```

- For web apps, you can set it as a secure cookie to maintain the session

On every request, the token is sent back to your server, where you verify the signature and check the expiration. If everything checks out, you continue processing the request.

This session model keeps your backend stateless, scalable, and secure, and works consistently across platforms.

> We cover all of this in the video tutorials linked above, including:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All of this is covered in the video tutorials linked above, including:
```

- Generating and verifying custom JWTs
- Handling session storage with Secure Store and cookies
- Protecting API routes with authentication logic

</Collapsible>

> ## Auth solutions

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## Auth solutions
```

If you prefer not to build a full authentication system from scratch, several services offer built-in solutions with first-class support for Expo. Here are some of the most popular options:

> ### Better Auth

Reviewer: Let's convert these H3s into collapsibles.

### Clerk

[Clerk](https://clerk.com/expo-authentication) is a powerful, full-featured authentication service with excellent Expo support. It includes email/password, passcodes, magic links, OAuth providers, and even passkeys. They also offer a native Expo module that handles much of the integration for you.

### Supabase

[Supabase](https://supabase.com/docs/guides/getting-started/tutorials/with-expo-react-native) provides a full backend platform, including a built-in authentication service that works with any OAuth provider. It integrates well with Expo apps and also includes support for email, magic links, and more.

### Cognito

[AWS Cognito](https://medium.com/@juliuscecilia33/aws-cognito-and-react-native-bf23ef7fea23) is Amazon's solution for managing user pools and identity. It connects seamlessly with other AWS services and can be integrated into Expo apps using AWS Amplify. It does require more configuration, but it's robust and scalable.

### Firebase Auth

> [Firebase Authentication](https://rnfirebase.io/auth/usage) is Google's auth platform and supports email, magic links, and OAuth providers. It works with React Native through [react-native-firebase](https://github.com/invertase/react-native-firebase), which is compatible with Expo development builds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Firebase Authentication](https://rnfirebase.io/auth/usage) is Google's auth platform and supports email, magic links, and OAuth providers. It works with React Native through [`react-native-firebase`](https://github.com/invertase/react-native-firebase), which is compatible with Expo development builds.
```

## Modern methods

Once you have a working authentication system in place, you can improve the user experience by adding optional but powerful enhancements like biometrics and passkeys. These features add convenience, trust, and speed to your login flows.

<Collapsible summary="Biometrics">

Biometrics like Face ID and Touch ID can be used to unlock the app or confirm identity after a valid session is established. These are not authentication methods on their own, but act as a local gate that makes re-authentication faster and more secure.

> React Native provides access to biometric APIs through libraries like [expo-local-authentication](/versions/latest/sdk/local-authentication) or [react-native-biometrics](https://github.com/SelfLender/react-native-biometrics).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
React Native provides access to biometric APIs through libraries like [`expo-local-authentication`](/versions/latest/sdk/local-authentication) or [`react-native-biometrics`](https://github.com/SelfLender/react-native-biometrics).
```

</Collapsible>

<Collapsible summary="Passkeys">

[Passkeys](https://safety.google/authentication/passkey) are a new, passwordless way to log in to apps and websites. Backed by Apple, Google, and Microsoft, they use platform-level cryptography and biometrics to authenticate users without passwords.

Passkeys offer a seamless and secure experience, but they require a user to already be authenticated before registering one. They also require extra configuration if you're not using a provider that handles them for you.

> - React Native passkey support: [react-native-passkeys](https://github.com/peterferguson/react-native-passkeys)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- React Native passkey support: [`react-native-passkeys`](https://github.com/peterferguson/react-native-passkeys)
```

- Native passkey support with Clerk: [Clerk Passkeys for Expo](https://clerk.com/docs/references/expo/passkeys)

</Collapsible>

## Recommendations

This guide covers a lot of ground, from basic email and password flows to fully custom OAuth implementations, session management, and modern methods like biometrics and passkeys. Not all of these need to be implemented at once.

In many cases, starting simple is the best approach. Shipping your app with something like email authentication using a magic link or one-time passcode is often more than enough to get through the App Store review process and start collecting feedback from real users.

That said, if you're building an app where you expect high traffic from day one or need to support sign-in across platforms with minimal friction, investing in a more complete authentication flow early on can make a big difference. It can help improve user onboarding, trust, and retention right from the start.

> Modern solutions like OAuth, biometrics, and passkeys are not required, but they can be excellent additions once your core system is in place. The key is to build authentication that fits your current needs, while staying flexible enough to grow with your product.
> 
> It's perfectly okay to start with a third-party service and refine your approach as your app matures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Modern solutions like OAuth, biometrics, and passkeys are not required, but they can be excellent additions once your core system is in place.

The key is to build authentication that fits your current needs, while staying flexible enough to grow with your product.
```

The last line just repeats the same message the last line of the previous paragraph. We can omit and replace as suggested above.

<BoxLink
  title="Authentication with OAuth or OpenID providers"
  description="Learn how to utilize the expo-auth-session library to implement authentication with OAuth or OpenID providers."
  href="/guides/authentication"
  Icon={BookOpen02Icon}
/>

> <BoxLink

Reviewer: Let's remove these? I am not sure if they are required.

  title="Google Sign-In with Expo Router API Routes"
  description="Learn how to implement Google Sign-In with Expo Router API Routes"

>   href="/guides/google-authentication"

Reviewer: It seems the link to the guide and the title, description do not match each other.
